Sick euthyroid syndrome in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic heart failure.

Changes in peripheral thyroid hormone concentration and metabolism can occur in euthyroid patients suffering from severe non-thyroidal illnesses. Recently, sick euthyroid syndrome has been reported in patients suffering from advanced heart failure. This study was to evaluate prospectively the presence and pathophysiological implications of sick euthyroid syndrome in moderate-to-severe chronic heart failure patients. The study population were 199 chronic heart failure patients admitted over a 2-year period to our heart failure unit for assessment of cardiac transplantation. They were closely followed up with clinical and instrumental examinations (including clinical, hormonal, nutritional and cardiac function evaluations). Sick euthyroid syndrome was defined as a serum total triiodothyronine value of less than the lowest normal limit (< 1.23 nmol.l-1) in the presence of a normal serum thyroid stimulating hormone concentration. Sick euthyroid syndrome was found in 36/199 patients (18%). According to the New York Heart Association (NYHA) classification of severity of heart failure, sick euthyroid syndrome patients appear in higher NYHA classes (31% of classes III and IV, vs 7% of class I and II). Such patients also weigh less and are more frequently malnourished. Alterations in cardiac index, ventricular filling pressures, functional impairment, and the liver function parameters, were more significant in sick euthyroid syndrome than in non-sick euthyroid syndrome patients. Serum norepinephrine and atrial natriuretic factor were significantly higher, and insulin significantly lower in the sick euthyroid syndrome group. During follow-up, deaths were significantly more frequent in sick euthyroid syndrome patients (13/27, 48%) than in non-sick euthyroid syndrome (30/141, 21%; P < 0.005). In six sick euthyroid syndrome patients who underwent heart transplantation, mean total triiodothyronine values increased from 0.9 +/- 0.1 before to 1.96 +/- 0.3 nmol.l(-1)post-transplantation (P < 0.05). In a large and representative population of patients with moderate-to-severe heart failure, sick euthyroid syndrome shows a prevalence of 18%. Its occurrence was related to the degree of functional cardiac impairment, but was not an independent negative prognostic factor. Preliminary results indicate that heart transplantation is associated with reversibility of sick euthyroid syndrome.