Inhibition of calcium currents and exocytosis by Lambert-Eaton syndrome antibodies in human lung cancer cells.

1. Human small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) cells are believed to express the antigens responsible for the production of pathological antibodies in the Lambert-Eaton syndrome (LES), a Ca2+ channel disorder in which quantal transmitter release from the motor nerve terminal is impaired. Whole-cell patch-clamp techniques were used to study the voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels expressed by H146 SCLC cells and the effects of LES antibodies on these channels. The types of Ca2+ channels were determined using biophysical properties and pharmacological sensitivity to several antagonists. 2. Whole-cell Ca2+ currents (ICa) in SCLC cells are sensitive to the dihydropyridine (DHP) nicardipine, omega-conotoxin GVIA (omega-CgTX GVIA) and omega-agatoxin IVA (omega-AgTX IVA). Nicardipine at 100 nM and 10 microM reduced ICa by 35 and 45% (n = 38 cells), respectively, while omega-CgTX GVIA (1 microM) inhibited ICa by 32% (n = 31). Application of omega-AgTX IVA at 50 and 100 nM to the cancer cells decreased ICa by 41 and 42%, respectively (n = 22). 3. Measurement of cell membrane capacitance (Cm) revealed that Ca(2+)-dependent exocytosis underlies the secretory activity of SCLC cells. Exocytosis, when induced by step depolarizing pulses and measured by increases in Cm, was markedly inhibited by nicardipine (10 microM) and omega-AgTX IVA (100 nM). In contrast, omega-CgTX GVIA (1 microM) was not as effective in altering increases in Cm. 4. From negative (-80 mV) and depolarized (-40 mV) holding potentials, both peak and plateau ICa were inhibited by the presence of LES antibodies (1 mg ml-1 IgG). LES serum also reduced depolarization-induced increases in Cm by 48% (n = 15). 5. To determine whether the LES antibodies are downregulating a specific type(s) of Ca2+ channel, nicardipine (10 microM), omega-CgTX GVIA (1 microM) or omega-AgTX IVA (100 nM) was applied to tumour cells that had been previously exposed to LES serum for 24 h. The most pronounced change was that omega-AgTX IVA was 38-84% less effective at reducing ICa after the IgG treatment. The effectiveness of nicardipine was diminished by 18% after incubation with the LES antibodies, whereas the omega-CgTX GVIA was seen to be more effective. These results suggest that LES IgG downregulates P-type Ca2+ channels and, possibly, to a lesser extent L-type channels. 6. In view of recent evidence that P-type Ca2+ channels mediate cholinergic transmitter release at the mammalian neuromuscular junction (NMJ), the expression of P-type Ca2+ channels in the SCLC cells and the reactivity of LES IgG with these channels support the hypothesis that P-type Ca2+ channels in these cancer cells may trigger the autoantibody production in this disorder. The antibodies so produced are implicated in the functional impairment of the Ca2+ channels characteristic of LES.