Voltage-dependent sodium channels in human small-cell lung cancer cells: role in action potentials and inhibition by Lambert-Eaton syndrome IgG.

Sodium channels of human small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) cells were examined with whole-cell and single-channel patch clamp methods. In the tumor cells from SCLC cell line NCI-H146, the majority of the voltage-gated Na+ channels are only weakly tetrodotoxin (TTX)-sensitive (Kd = 215 nM). With the membrane potential maintained at -60 to -80 mV, these cells produced all-or-nothing action potentials in response to depolarizing current injection (> 20 pA). Similar all-or-nothing spikes were also observed with anodal break excitation. Removal of external Ca2+ did not affect the action potential production, whereas 5 microM TTX or substitution of Na+ with choline abolished it. Action potentials elicited in the Ca(2+)-free condition were reversibly blocked by 4 mM MnCl2 due to the Mn(2+)-induced inhibition of voltage-dependent sodium currents (INa). Therefore, Na+ channels, not Ca2+ channels, underlie the excitability of SCLC cells. Whole-cell INa was maximal with step-depolarizing stimulations to 0 mV, and reversed at +45.2 mV, in accord with the predicted Nernst equilibrium potential for a Na(+)-selective channel. INa evoked by depolarizing test potentials (-60 to +40 mV) exhibited a transient time course and activation/inactivation kinetics typical of neuronal excitable membranes; the plot of the Hodgkin-Huxley parameters, m infinity and h infinity, also revealed biophysical similarity between SCLC and neuronal Na+ channels. The single channel current amplitude, as measured with the inside-out patch configuration, was 1.0 pA at -20 mV with a slope conductance of 12.1 pS. The autoantibodies implicated in the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LES), which are known to inhibit ICa and INa in bovine adrenal chromaffin cells, also significantly inhibited INa in SCLC cells. These results indicate that (i) action potentials in human SCLC cells result from the regenerative increase in voltage-gated Na+ channel conductance; (ii) fundamental characteristics of SCLC Na+ channels are the same as the classical sodium channels found in a variety of excitable cells; and (iii) in some LES patients, SCLC Na+ channels are an additional target of the pathological IgG present in the patients' sera.