A randomised controlled trial of a mindfulness intervention for men with advanced prostate cancer.

Prostate cancer is the most common male cancer in developed countries, and in Australia approximately one-fifth of men with prostate cancer have advanced disease. By comparison to men with localised prostate cancer, men with advanced disease report higher levels of psychological distress; poorer quality of life; and have an increased risk of suicide. To date no psychological intervention research specifically targeting men with advanced prostate cancer has been reported. In this paper we present the protocol of a current randomised controlled trial to assess the effectiveness of a professionally-led mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) group intervention to improve psychological well-being in men with advanced prostate cancer. Ninety-five men per condition (190 men in total) will be recruited through clinicians in the Australian and New Zealand Urogenital and Prostate Cancer Trials Group and in major treatment centres in Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia. Patients are randomised to: (1) tele-based MBCT intervention or (2) patient education. A series of previously validated and reliable self-report measures will be administered to men at four time points: baseline/recruitment, and at 3, 6, and 9 months after recruitment and intervention commencement. Engagement with the principles of mindfulness and adherence to practice will be included as potential mediators of intervention effect. Primary outcomes are anxiety, depression and cancer-specific distress. Secondary outcomes are health-related quality of life (QoL) and benefit finding. Disease variables (e.g. cancer grade, stage) will be assessed through medical records. This study will address a critical but as yet unanswered research question: to identify an effective way to reduce psychological distress; and improve the quality of life for men with advanced prostate cancer. http://ACTRN12612000306819.