Postprostatectomy established stress urinary incontinence treated with duloxetine.

To evaluate the efficacy of duloxetine to treat stress urinary incontinence, 1 of the most frequent complications after radical prostatectomy. Conservative measures and surgery are well-established treatments. However, drug treatment could be an intermediate option. All patients had >1 year of follow-up after radical prostatectomy to avoid interfering with the natural recovery period (established stress urinary incontinence). Continence was measured by the average daily use of pads and the International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire-short form. In Spain, it is necessary to proceed with off-label use formality, and all patients were informed and agreed. The initial dose of duloxetine was 30 mg once daily and was increased to 60 mg/d. Drug treatment was maintained for 9 months. From June 2006 to July 2007, 68 patients were included. The median age was 68 years (range 52-79). The median duration of duloxetine treatment was 5.56 months (range 1-18). A statistically significant decrease in the International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire-Urinary Incontinence-short form (from 13 to 9; P < .001) and the average number of pads/d (from 2 to 1; P < .001) was observed between the initial and 3-month visit. At the end of the follow-up period, 74% and 57% of the patients had a reduced International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire-Urinary Incontinence-short form score and a decrease in the number of pads used daily, respectively. Of the 68 patients, 32 (47%) presented with some side effects and 17 patients stopped the treatment because of adverse effects (25%). Our results suggest that duloxetine is a possible alternative treatment of postprostatectomy established stress urinary incontinence. The continence improvement results were mild and conditioned in part by the frequency of the side effects. Provided that duloxetine does not preclude later continence surgery and the benefits are observed at the first visit, we believe it can be a treatment option for selected patients.