Karyotype-phenotype correlation in partial trisomies of the short arm of chromosome 6: a family case report and review of the literature.

The first child (proband) of nonconsanguineous Caucasian parents underwent genetic investigation because she was affected with congenital choanal atresia, heart defects and kidney hyposplasia with mild transient renal insufficiency. The direct DNA sequencing after PCR of the CHD7 gene, which is thought to be responsible for approximately 60-70% of the cases of CHARGE syndrome/association, found no mutations. The cytogenetic analysis (standard GTG banding karyotype) revealed the presence of extrachromosomal material on 10q. The chromosome analysis was completed with array CGH (30 kb resolution), MLPA and FISH, which allowed the identification of three 6p regions (6p.25.3p23 × 3): 2 of these regions are normally located on chromosome 6, and the third region is translocated to the long arm of chromosome 10. The same chromosomal rearrangement was subsequently found in the father, who was affected with congenital ptosis and progressive hearing loss, and in the proband's sister, the second child, who presented at birth with choanal atresia and congenital heart defects. The mutated karyotypes, which were directly inherited, are thought to be responsible for a variable phenotype, including craniofacial dysmorphisms, choanal atresia, congenital ptosis, sensorineural hearing loss, heart defects, developmental delay, and renal dysfunction. Nevertheless, to achieve a complete audiological assessment of the father, he underwent further investigation that revealed an increased level of the coagulation factor XIII (300% increased activity), fluctuating levels of fibrin D-dimer degradation products (from 296 to 1,587 ng/ml) and a homoplasmic mitochondrial DNA mutation: T961G in the MTRNR1 (12S rRNA) gene. He was made a candidate for cochlear implantation. Preoperative high-resolution computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the temporal bone revealed the presence of an Arnold-Chiari malformation type I. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the second report on partial 6p trisomy that involves the 10q terminal region. Furthermore, we report the first case of documented Arnold-Chiari malformation type I and increased factor XIII activity associated with 6p trisomy. We present a comprehensive report of the familial cases and an exhaustive literature review.