Myoclonic astatic epilepsy (Doose syndrome) - a lamotrigine responsive epilepsy?

Myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE, Doose syndrome) is a difficult to treat idiopathic generalized epilepsy of early childhood. MAE frequently shows the course of an epileptic encephalopathy and may result in permanent cognitive impairment. Systematic analyses on clinical effects of different AED combinations are still needed. The purpose of our study was to analyze the therapeutic effect of adjunctive lamotrigine (LTG) in pharmacoresistant MAE patients. In an exploratory, retrospective study, 10 pharmacoresistant MAE patients were included who had been admitted to the Northern German Epilepsy Center between 07/2007 and 12/2010 and had been treated with LTG. Documentation was performed with the electronic seizure diary Epivista. A total observation period of 32 weeks was defined: 8-week 'pre LTG treatment phase' (before starting with LTG), 16-week 'titration phase' (starting with very low LTG doses), 8-week 'follow-up phase'. Seizure frequency, medication and adverse events were extracted from the electronic diary and evaluated in each particular patient. The individual reduction of seizure frequency per day was defined as primary outcome variable. Additionally, a dose-effect-relationship was analyzed for each patient. Six out of ten patients were seizure free during the follow-up phase. Statistical analysis indicated a significant seizure reduction in seven patients at follow-up compared to the pre LTG treatment phase. Seizure frequency did not significantly decrease in two patients and increased in one patient. A significant relationship between seizure frequency per day and LTG dosage during titration and follow-up phase could be demonstrated in nine patients. Group statistics using the exact Wilcoxon test revealed a significant reduction in seizure frequency (p = 0.049, two-sided). Our data provide evidence that adjunctive LTG is an eligible therapeutic option for the treatment of pharmacoresistant MAE and encourage further prospective studies to verify this observation.