[Pulmonary infection in neutropenia].

MEDICAL HISTORY AND CLINICAL COURSE: A 42-year-old patient with hairy cell leukemia had been treated for 3 years by a hematologist in private practice. Initially the patient received 1 course of cladribine upon which the disease went into complete remission. 6 weeks ago a relapse was diagnosed and combination therapy with cladibrin and rituximab was initiated. Now the patient presented to the emergency room with shortness of breath and pain when breathing. In the chest x-ray, patchy infiltrates and pleural effusions were found on both sides. The subsequently performed computed tomography showed bilateral compactions with an Halo suspicious for fungal infiltrates. Upon admission to the hospital, an empirical antibiotic therapy with clarithromycin and piperacillin/tazobactam was initiated, which was later escalated to meropenem and linezolid. Additionally, an antifungal therapy with voriconazole was started and later switched to liposomal amphotericin B. At his admission, a positive aspergillus antigen could be detected in the microbiological laboratory. Under antimycotic treatment the aspergillus antigen was repeatedly negative. The patient presented with pronounced cytopenias and after a switch of therapy to vemurafenib and filgrastim, the hematopoiesis could only be stimulated insufficiently. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit three days after admission with severe respiratory failure. He died on day 8 after admission. AUTOPSY AND DIAGNOSIS: Diagnosis was consistent with relapse of hairy cell leukemia with positive BRAF mutation and a bone marrow infiltration > 80 %. Autopsy revealed a significant hepato-splenomegaly, a lack of erythro-, granulo- and thrombopoiesis. Clots interspersed with fungal hyphae were found in both lungs and an infarction of the spleen with evidence of fungal hyphae was detected. The cultural findings post mortem on yeast or mold were negative. Patients with refractory hairy cell leukemia and prolonged neutropenia are at increased risk for systemic fungal infections. Therefore, prohylactic antimycotic therapy should be considered early in this group of patients. The therapeutic approach of vemurafenib in treatment-refractory hairy cell leukemia is promising and offers an additional treatment option. In the present case, the patient could unfortunately not be stabilized due to the septic complications.