An HF-1a/HF-1b/MEF-2 combinatorial element confers cardiac ventricular specificity and established an anterior-posterior gradient of expression.

The molecular determinants that direct gene expression to the ventricles of the heart are for the most part unknown. Additionally, little data is available on how the anterior/posterior axis of the heart tube is determined and whether the left and right atrial and ventricular chambers are assigned as part of this process. Utilizing myosin light chain-2 ventricular promoter/beta-galactosidase reporter transgenes, we have determined the minimal cis-acting sequences required for ventricular-specific gene expression. In multiple independent transgenic mouse lines, we found that both a 250 base pair myosin light chain-2 ventricular promoter fragment, as well as a dimerized 28 bp sub-element (HF-1) containing binding sites for HF1a and HF1b/MEF2 factors, directed ventricular-specific reporter expression from as early as the endogenous gene, at day 7.5-8.0 post coitum. While the endogenous gene is expressed uniformly throughout both ventricles, the transgenes were expressed in a right ventricular/conotruncal dominant fashion, suggesting that they contain only a subset of the elements which respond to positional information in the developing heart tube. Expression of the transgene was cell autonomous and its temporospatial characteristics not affected by mouse strain/methylation state of the genome. To determine whether ventricular-specific expression of the transgene was dependent upon regulatory genes required for correct ventricular differentiation, the 250 base pair transgene was bred into both retinoid X receptoralpha and Nkx2-5 null backgrounds. The transgene was expressed in both mutant backgrounds, despite the absence of endogenous myosin light chain-2 ventricular transcript in Nkx2-5 null embryos. Ventricular specification, as judged by transgene expression, appeared to occur normally in both mutants. Thus, the HF-1 element, directs chamber-specific transcription of a transgene reporter independently of retinoid X receptoralpha and Nkx2-5, and defines a minimal combinatorial pathway for ventricular chamber gene expression. The patterned expression of this transgene may provide a model system in which to investigate the cues that dictate anterior-posterior (right ventricle/left ventricle) gradients during mammalian heart development.