Interactions of intrathecally administered ziconotide, a selective blocker of neuronal N-type voltage-sensitive calcium channels, with morphine on nociception in rats.

Ziconotide is a selective, potent and reversible blocker of neuronal N-type voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs). Morphine is an agonist of mu-opioid receptors and inhibits N-type VSCC channels via a G-protein coupling mechanism. Both agents are antinociceptive when they are administered intrathecally (spinally). The present study investigated the acute and chronic (7-day) interactions of intrathecally administered ziconotide and morphine on nociception in several animal models of pain. In the acute study, intrathecal bolus injections of morphine and ziconotide alone produced dose-dependent inhibition of formalin-induced tonic flinch responses and withdrawal responses to paw pressure. The combination of ziconotide and morphine produced an additive inhibition of formalin-induced tonic flinch responses and a significant leftward shift of the morphine dose-response curve in the paw pressure test. After chronic (7-day) intrathecal infusion, ziconotide enhanced morphine analgesia in the formalin test. In contrast, chronic intrathecal morphine infusion produced tolerance to analgesia, but did not affect ziconotide antinociception. Antinociception produced by ziconotide alone was the same as that observed when the compound was co-administered with morphine to morphine-tolerant rats. In the hot-plate and tail immersion tests, chronic intrathecal infusion of morphine lead to rapid tolerance whereas ziconotide produced sustained analgesia with no loss of potency throughout the infusion period. Although ziconotide in combination with morphine produced an apparent synergistic analgesic effects during the initial phase of continuous infusion, it did not prevent morphine tolerance to analgesia. These results demonstrate that (1) acute intrathecal administrations of ziconotide and morphine produce additive or synergistic analgesic effects; (2) chronic intrathecal morphine infusion results in tolerance to analgesia but does not produce cross-tolerance to ziconotide; (3) chronic intrathecal ziconotide administration produces neither tolerance nor cross-tolerance to morphine analgesia; (4) intrathecal ziconotide does not prevent or reverse morphine tolerance.