The effects of halothane on voltage-dependent calcium channels in isolated Langendorff-perfused rat heart.

Halothane has been previously shown in vitro to decrease both the inward calcium current in isolated cells and the density of calcium antagonist binding sites in cardiac sarcolemmal membranes prepared from several species, including humans, presumably contributing to the negative inotropic effects seen with volatile anesthetics. In this study we examined whether halothane produced similar changes in calcium channel antagonist binding characteristics ex vivo in an intact perfused heart by using isradipine, a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker that binds specifically to the alpha 1 subunit of the L-type voltage-dependent calcium channel. The rat hearts were perfused by the Langendorff method in the presence of halothane and unlabeled isradipine. After the hearts were homogenized and prepared into membranes, a radioligand binding assay was performed and binding curves obtained. Data were analyzed by nonlinear regression analysis of a one-site binding equation and were evaluated by a paired t test. Halothane protected or inhibited the binding of unlabeled isradipine to calcium channels in a dose-dependent manner such that as the halothane is removed during the membrane preparation process, previously obscured sites were then available for specific binding of the radioligand. The sites that were protected by halothane had a lower affinity for [3H]-isradipine than controls. In both isolated membranes and the intact heart, halothane changes the availability of calcium channel antagonist binding sites, indicating a change in conformation of the voltage-dependent calcium channel in the presence of anesthetic. This change may result from a direct effect on the protein or from an indirect effect mediated through the membrane lipid bilayer. It also is demonstrated that halothane "protected" channels are probably a modified class of channels compared to those in control tissues as exemplified by the much lower affinity that the protected channels have for [3H]-isradipine. We conclude that a major mechanism by which halothane depresses contractility is mediated through the voltage-dependent calcium channel, and this process results from a conformational change in the channel.